Hello and welcome to Unit Testing for unity.
The workshops.
In this workshop section, we're going to cover lots of different small examples that each show us some
features of unit testing.
Let's take a look at the contents here.
First I'll give this overview that I'm going through now in this section introduction.
And then we'll step through each workshop.
Typically each workshop refers to one scene in our one sample project.
So if you download that sample project you can follow along with each of the scenes.
We'll cover my math system, which is a very basic example, just to reacquaint us with what unit testing
is inside unity.
Then we'll move on to a my data loader example, and that one I'll be showing a basic version and then
a more advanced version using some additional features that are optional but awesomely powerful inside
unity for unit testing.
Then we'll go through an example that I wanted to do something with rendered graphics.
So I have a cube that we can operate with the arrow keys or with a gamepad, and we'll call that our
character.
We're going to step through a few examples, looking at more and more complex use cases for testing,
eventually doing a physics based movement, taking input and moving our character with rigid body,
and looking at how and why we would want to do unit testing around that.
Generally speaking, the more unity features you use and the more runtime animation you do, it makes
more challenges to the testing process.
So we'll talk a little bit about that.
There's always an opportunity for me to add more content here.
So we're going to be doing some advanced topics as well.
And this workshop is going to allow us to dive deeper into some particular subtopics.
All the source code is available in the downloaded source code for the project itself.
So you can grab that.
And the format here is going to be an improvised screen share.
I'm going to do longer takes than normal, and just think out loud when there's some different things
that I want to talk about and share with you about the powers and the challenges of unit testing.
I'm going to be reviewing some existing code and here and there be creating new code along the way.
A great way to look at this and use this information is to download the sample project and follow along
here and there.
I'll encourage you to add a new production method to be tested, or new test methods to cover what you've
got in production code.
You can build on to the existing samples that I've got here.
Or you could certainly create your own sample scenes.
And as a recap, let's read here the benefits of unit testing.
Some of them include adding code confidence, as well as allowing for bolder refactors to your code
base with more awareness before and after the refactor of the status of your project.
And overall, this is going to save time because we've seen that while it may feel like we're always
adding new features in the bulk of our work effort, we learn from research that software development
is mostly about maintaining an existing existing code, and that's really where unit testing is going
to shine.
So it's going to save us time over the life of the project.
The results that we expect from this course and from using unit testing is to have more confidence and
robustness in our code base.
We're going to have more single purpose classes and methods, which is a great design principle to focus
on and certainly helps us in our testability.
And we're going to be encouraging more simple solutions.
And we'll talk about that in some of these examples.
To recap the simplest example here.
This is also the first of the workshops we're going to dive into.
If we have a mind math system class, and it has two methods on it to add and subtract.
Now you could imagine once you see this code base working, you could add your own method for multiply
or divide, and then add some unit tests on top of that.
Great way to practice here.
And this is purposely the simplest of the scenes we'll go through.
So if you're still getting used to the fundamentals and you want to make sure that it really sinks in,
I suggest spend a little bit more time on this part of the video and this part of the code base until
you're feeling good, and then move on after that.
And again, here is a sample of the type of unit tests we'll be creating.
This is a simple, complete, appropriate test to cover that my math system.
So here what we do is we follow the paradigm of arrange, act and assert.
This is an optional way to approach your unit testing, just to organize your own thoughts as you go.
Sometimes along the way you may be doing asynchronous code development.
So in that methodology I would do arrange, act, await and assert.
And if you're not exactly sure what a wait is, we'll look at the await and async methodology for doing
asynchronous coding as part of the workshop.
Now while working on the source code here for contributing to the project and for this course, what
I did was look at each of the dependencies.
Unity has certain libraries in the unity package manager available for us to do the official unity solution
for unit testing.
Now, what I did here is instead of using the one x which is in release, I use an experimental version.
So you may notice that the test runner as I'm going through in the video looks.
A little bit different than maybe some screenshots you've seen on the web, or if you have experience
with the test runner yourself.
What I'm showing today might look a little different.
The sample project you're going to download is going to match the look of this video, because I've
included that dependency in there.
There's reasons why I did it.
It's not just that the test runner looks different and is more stable, which I think is the case.
It also the library behind it allows us to do a few additional things, particularly around some asynchronous
development and testing.
You can take a look at this version text file that's included in the project.
If you want to see how and where and why included each of these dependencies.
The sample project that we're going to go into includes a Readme asset, which we can click on and see
this nice menu on the right.
It's an easy way to get oriented to remember some popular links, and to click right into each of the
samples that you want to get into.
I have a particular layout that you'll see me use here, which is to keep the test runner in the center
there just so it's nice and big for the purposes of the video.
Often in development, my test runner would maybe sit on the right side there, but I like to have it
front and center, especially for the purpose of discussing the tests.
You can resize these windows and layouts of course, any way you want, but some of the key ones to
take a look at here would be the project window, the test runner, and then the inspector, which we'll
be taking a look at.
So we're about to dive in here and take a look at the first of the workshops.
I've divided it up into several sections, again focusing on some different sub topics.
I also thought along the way to more or less organize them from one up into the highest number, starting
with the easiest and least complex, and then building on those concepts there.
Each of the demo scenes runs by itself.
You just hit play in the console window.
You'll see some readouts and stuff like that.
You can follow along, and some of the scenes, there's actually something to do when you hit play.
Sometimes there's no UI, it's just kind of simple and you just look at some debug log statements.
So I'm really excited to share these workshops as a great way to dive in.
So let's get started.
We're going to open up the unity editor.
I've already downloaded the source code following the course resources from earlier in the lesson.
We'll open up that course sample project, and then we're going to open and play one or more scenes
in each of the workshop.
First we're going to look at the Readme asset that gives us some orientation in the project.
We'll also look at the package manager, explore the project structure and then take a look at the test
runner window.
So here we're just giving an overview to kind of what the sample project is and how the workshops are
formatted.
And then we'll move in and go through each of the workshops.
So here we are inside unity.
I'll do my best to keep my webcam head out of the way of the action here.
And what we're going to be looking at is that the Readme, which is available in a couple spots, we
can go up here and explore this menu option to open the Readme.
We can also browse through the project window and go down here and just click on the readme.
Either way, it's going to open up the readme in the Inspector.
Let's take a look at what we've got here.
We've got some links to the course and to the sample project just for orientation where this information
is available.
If you want to click over and check out those links.
And then the Getting Started section.
There's a quick way to get to some of the popular examples, so you can certainly browse through the
project window and find them.
But this is a nice way to get oriented.
Something else I wanted to take a look at is the package manager here.
Just if you're downloading this project, you'll see the same packages here.
But if you decide for the purpose of your learning here or further into the future to bring these lessons
into a different project, you're going to want to make your package manager look similar if you want
to have the same experience here.
So notice that I've got the end substitute package.
I've also got the code coverage package, the test framework.
And for the purpose of this course, notice that I have a pre-release version that gives us some additional
functionality.
This is optional for unit testing.
You certainly don't need it for the bulk of the features of unit testing, but I think it's got some
cool cutting edge stuff.
So that's what we're going to focus on, and I recommend you give it a try.
Something else of note here.
This version file that I have selected will dig into that.
That's just some notes that I took along the way to talk a little bit about the dependencies that I
chose and why.
So we won't go into it here.
This may change over time as well.
But just check out this file if you're curious how and why I've used each of the dependencies, and
why I use that pre-release version I mentioned explicitly there.
And lastly, front and center here, let's look at the test runner window.
Now that window is available from Window General and Test Runner.
And it's included in every default unity installation as I mentioned.
I've added the pre-release of one given package, so the layout of mine might look a little different
than the standard here in this layout.
What we've got here is the ability to toggle on and off edit mode tests, and on and off play mode tests.
They're shown here in the same tab view.
This is really great.
Then what I can do is browse the different categories.
Now I've created all the tests we're looking at and I've flagged them each as a specific category.
So if I want to look at just one particular one like my math system, then it just filters the view
here and it'll show you only the edit or only the play and of a given category.
That really helps you.
Then what I can do here with just the edit selected, for example, is be able to see all the tests
that are there.
And down here at the bottom I can run selected or run all I'll run selected, for example.
And what it does is it goes through and runs all the test code.
This is kind of the core of the methodology we're approaching here is that periodically in your development
you want to test your own code base.
You come to this window and you manually hit that run selected or that run all button.
We see all green here indicating success up here at the top.
It gives us a little recap that we've got 100 tests that succeeded.
We've got zero that failed, and we've got zero that were skipped or ignored.
So a great practice as you're doing unit testing is to ensure that all of your tests pass.
Don't allow a failing test in your project for a long time.
You want to address that.
Move it out of the way.
Even if you know there's a migration coming in the future.
So the best practice here is to keep your tests updated with your code changes and always have them
passing.
So here we show the best practice in effect.
In the next workshop we'll take a closer look at the source code involved.
But that's it for this section of looking at the workshops and the sample project.
Hello and welcome.
In this workshop, we're going to be taking a look at the My Math system, stepping into what is a pretty
simple example, just getting us reacquainted with the basics of unit testing.
So in this demo you can use the Core Sample project to follow along.
We're going to be opening up the unity editor, opening up that core sample project, and then we'll
open and play some scenes here.
We're going to be looking at the My Math system as well as the test behind it, and we'll do a recap
of unit testing, just kind of talking about whatever basic concepts I see in there and think to mention.
And we'll also talk about parameterized values, which is an intermediate way that you can approach
testing.
And it's a good additional skill to have as you approach unit testing.
Let's dive in.
So here I'm inside the unity editor I've opened the my math system example.
Let's just give the scene itself a play.
Sometimes in these workshops the scene is more exciting.
This one not so exciting.
We'll go ahead and hit play down here in the bottom window, we see some simple text that's helping
us understand we're in the unit testing demo, and we're going to just play the scene and view the console.
So let's look at the console.
The console says this scene has no UI.
See the unity console here we are in the console.
Really.
It's just going to show us a value that's been spit out after a successful operation.
So this would, in real production code, be a much more interesting scene.
Perhaps there's actually the game menu or the game play happening here.
This is quite a lean scene here where there's not much to see, but you can imagine that that could
be.
It's not particularly important that there be a runtime scene for the testing sake.
I just want to often talk about the balance between here's your production code doing its production
thing.
And then over here is the test code doing its test thing.
So production code, we always experience that by hitting play on a unity scene just like this.
And to do our unit testing we do something different.
What we do here is we look at the test runner window.
We explore the category appropriate to what we want to look at here.
We're just looking at the my math system.
And then we hit let's see.
Let's just do the edit mode test.
We'll do run all here and all the tests run just like that.
Now it didn't actually run the scene.
It's just running kind of off on the side in its own little universe, running those tests inside an
edit mode.
So edit mode tests talking a little bit about the difference there.
Edit mode tests run in edit mode, which in unity there's two primary modes.
Basically, from the moment you hit the play button to the moment you hit the play button, that is
play mode.
That's generally where the user experiences the unity gameplay.
Any time we're not in that mode, we're in edit mode.
Sitting right here, we're in edit mode.
These tests are run in edit mode because they don't necessarily need all the complexity of a runtime
scene.
This helps us have a more simple little isolated area where these codes run.
Now sometimes you need the conveniences of monobehaviours and runtime functionality.
That's where the play mode comes into into uses.
And here we've got some play mode tests as well.
So each time I click one of these checkboxes, you can see it's showing us some slightly different lists
of what we've got available.
So here in play mode I'm going to hit run all.
And here it's actually creating a brand new scene.
Running a runtime scene that's just for demo sake with whatever test code I've got, and then returns
us back to the original scene we were in.
If we didn't have the scene saved, it would prompt us and say, hey, you're about to run a play mode
test.
We're going to temporarily leave your scene.
Do you want to save your scene first?
Generally, that's a good idea, so look out for that.
Now let's look at the source code.
Let's first look at the runtime production code.
So we'll open up the My Math system example.
Each of these workshops has, generally speaking one game object with one example script that kicks
it all off.
So when we look at that, here we are in the code editor and we can see the complete my math system
example.
Now this is a monobehaviour because I want to have the conveniences of code sitting on a game object.
And then inside the await here I'm going to simulate some production code.
Now it's very lean, there's not much to it, and it kind of looks the same as the test we're about
to look at, because I create the class from scratch and then I call a method on it, and then I show
the results.
But it's important to know that in a production example, in a real game project, this equivalent would
be many classes and all the scenes and all the prefabs and all the complexity you would generally have
in your project.
But here I'm keeping it purposely very lean.
So notice what we do here.
We create the my math system.
We grab a couple of ints and populate them with the values five and ten.
And then we call the my Math system.
And we pass in the five and ten together.
And then here we show the result.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So here I hit play.
And down here in the console window we see the result is 15.
Now, I like the simplicity of this coding example, because it starts us thinking about in a world
where unit tests never existed, how would I go about being sure that this code is functional?
Well, perhaps this code of my math system is used in many, many places of your game, and you simply,
any time you want to see and validate that this system is working well, you just play the game and
your game might be several minutes long, or it could be several hours long.
And this particular system that's under test could be used throughout so many different places, depending
on different user behavior and input and situations.
Perhaps the time of day would be matter.
And so it's difficult for you to know am I really testing it in raw isolation?
So one first move I could do if I wanted to do some validation is I could copy this here, paste it
here.
And call this here and test.
Well, what if it was six?
And what if it was 11?
A to, B to.
So now I'm testing not a unit test, but I'm just validating two different examples here.
So I'm doing this one first and I'm doing that in second.
Now this is called user testing or play mode testing or integration testing where I'm actually running
production code.
And I'm just trying it out as a user, hoping that I accidentally ask it to do a bunch of different
operations, see that none of them fail.
But you could imagine that what I'm doing here is adding stuff that I don't really want for the end
user experience.
I'm just trying to give myself a little bit more confidence in my own code by calling some functionality
extra times.
You might also set a boolean somewhere in your project that says like is debug mode is true, and then
you throughout your production code.
If that's the situation, you'll do a little extra testing.
Now that's not bad.
In certain situations, it can definitely help you, but let's look at how much better the situation
can be.
If instead of doing this, I run unit tests.
So here's where this project the code sits.
In this project we've got the My Math system, My Math system example, which we've looked at.
The structure of that and the way that they work together is talked about earlier in the course.
But we have one editor test and one runtime test that we'll talk about.
Again, any editor test is going to run an edit mode, and it's generally ideal for things that do not
use unity specific classes like Monobehaviour.
Monobehaviour is designed only to run in its fullest way in play mode.
So here it's not too appropriate.
So.
But for simple tests like the one that we've got here, it's great.
The runtime area here where we have the play mode test would be a great place.
And each of these workshops I do one of each just so you can see the differences.
But it's important to think that in certain situations, depending on what you're testing, probably
a unit test in edit mode is more appropriate in this situation.
That's definitely the case later when we're talking about moving with input and doing something with
physics, maybe the play mode test is required there, because input and physics are really designed
as play mode experiences.
So it's important to know that distinction.
And I'll bring it up here and there.
So let's look at the mind math system test.
And see how that is organized.
So here, notice that the My Math system test has a few different.
Has a few different methods under it.
Each of the names that we see here are the names of the test methods.
So let's start with the first one.
The convention that I like to use is followed here, and we'll go into it in the code I generally put
first, what method are we testing, what are we expecting and then what's the situation.
So here it says the add method is what we're testing.
We expect the result will be 15 when we pass in five and ten.
So a nice shortcut here is that as you're running any tests you can just double click it to run it again.
And then I can right click it.
Sorry, I was in play mode.
Double click it and it runs again.
Great.
Still green.
And I can right click it and choose open source code.
That's an easy way to get right to the right class and right to the right method.
Here again is that method name that we saw.
Again add result is 15 when five and ten.
The reason that that's important is that if you have lots of test classes with lots of test methods,
and I hope that you do in your project in order to reason which in a test runner is which in the code
base here, it's nice to have that consistent naming.
So here what we do, we do the arrange, act and assert methodology.
In the arrange.
What we're going to do first is just create a fresh instance of what we want to test.
That way we know it hasn't been sitting around, doesn't have any old data inside of it.
It's always a good practice.
Then we're going to act upon that.
This is like, what is the one method if you can get away with it?
Maybe two methods that really do the testing.
But one method is ideal.
Here we're adding together five and ten.
And then in the assert we're going to use this assert language.
The assert class has a certain structure to it where you say I assert that something is something.
And you can look at the documentation on that to see some variety of ways that you can format that.
But often I use is equal to or is true or is false.
So those are ones that you'll see quite commonly here.
So when I run that because the code runs correctly it adds five and ten to be 15.
That's it.
We're able to do that.
Now remember the example I was giving in the production code.
What if you wanted to test five and ten and then test six and 11 and then test seven and 12 or whatever
combinations?
The better you get at testing, you'll realize how many tests you really need to provide adequate coverage.
There's a lot of an art and a science around what's the minimum number of tests you can provide that
maximize your impact, and the code coverage that you have?
So one of the things that I wanted to talk about as part of this particular workshop is what are called
parameterized tests.
So instead of just copying this one, pasting it below, and tweaking the values to add together six
and 11 or 0 and negative ten, we can ask unity to run the same exact test, but passing in some different
values.
There's a lot of different options you have here.
I'm just showing one of them.
But let's take a look down here.
We say, and together that we assume the result is correct when these values.
So the method names a little bit more vague because it's parameterized, I don't necessarily know.
Is this going to test five and ten is 15.
Notice here instead of the what I did before which was declaring five and ten.
In the body of the method I use this particular language, I use something called value source.
And then I pass it in.
What unity does is it populates this first passes values in here.
So let's say it's five.
Then it grabs another value source here.
Let's say that one is ten and it assumes that they are five plus ten added together.
So each time it runs, it's going to do the equivalent of the last test that we saw.
But instead of being hard coded to just one set of values, it's going to mix it up and show a variety
of them.
Now again, there's lots of different ways you can format this.
So you want to look at the documentation for parameterized tests in unity.
But let's look at my specific case here.
Those value sources values A and b.
They just refer to a couple arrays that I've got up here.
And what it's going to do is just step through and it's going to test one and one, negative two and
negative two, negative three and negative three and pass them in.
You could organize them any way you want and test different scenarios where you maybe do seven, 11
and 12.
You test anything you want.
Now you don't have to test infinite amounts there.
This is where that art and science comes along.
You might want to test a couple of negative values zero in some scenarios and a couple of positive values.
Maybe what you're doing is not math based and you want to think about it another way, but what you're
looking for what are called corner cases.
So for example, if you were doing a division method and you wanted to test it mathematically, there's
a challenge about dividing by zero.
So you would want to see that you pass in zero and handle that elegantly.
You really need to know the specific domain that your production code lies in, in order to know how
to test it.
But here a couple of each positive and negative and stuff like that.
So let's look at how that looks in the unity editor.
So notice what it does here.
It actually runs 49 tests based on all the combinations that we've got there.
So it shows you when values are and then it passes in.
So that's really nice.
Now as you're looking at this output you might realize oh it's going to be important to me to test 100
and -100.
Great.
Then just go back and add those sample values in if you want to do other things instead of just a hard
coded list.
If you want to select a random values, there's lots of other options you have there.
Again, do some research on parameterized tests.
You can dig into the play mode test as well if you want, but since that's going to be more interesting
in other examples, we'll move on and conclude this one of the workshops.
Thanks.
Hello and welcome to this Unity Unit testing workshop.
We're going to look at my data loader Basic as an example.
Let's dig in.
So here in this demo I'm going to open up unity.
Open up our core sample project and take a look at the scene of my data loader basic.
Now the reason that I've chosen to do some sort of data loading is just to talk about, well, what
if our unit tests, which we hope are very dependable and isolated and run quickly for the sake of our
own testing methodologies?
What if they depend on other systems, like how do we know that we're able to test just one part?
In general, unit testing is testing a single unit, which you could think of as one method of one class.
But often our code is multiple classes depending together, and that can be a challenge for deciding
how to separate them and test them in isolation.
Also, you could have a system that depends on something asynchronous like rendering graphics, rendering
audio, or in this case, calling a back end server.
So I created a very simple example here that loads data you pass in a URL, it just calls some web page
and gets back the text of that web page.
So this is the simplest example, but you could imagine that this is any server logic calling to send
a high score from your game, calling to load player data, something related to multiplayer.
Perhaps all of those could depend on some asynchronous network traffic.
Let's take a look.
So here we are in the sample.
We've got my data loader basic.
Load it up.
Let's hit play.
In this particular demo.
There's not too real interesting things in this particular demo.
There's not anything too interesting happening at gameplay.
We'll go to the console here and see this scene has no UI.
See the unity console, and then it's just showing the length of what is returned from the server.
Anything not zero signifies hey, it loaded a page.
So very light.
Simple test.
I don't have error checking or these kinds of things built in.
It just assumes success for the sake of the simplicity of this demo.
If you're doing production code and you're calling servers, you'd want to add a lot more functionality
to it.
So that's the runtime experience, which is pretty simple and not that interesting.
Now if we look at the test runner here, we can set our category to be my data loader basic.
So it just shows us the tests related to this particular code.
And then we hit our edit mode.
Here again we have play mode but you can explore that on your own.
I find for this particular demo that edit mode is more interesting.
So I'm going to hit run all.
And we can see we've got success.
This says load async result contains doctype when is loaded.
So let's take a look at a little bit of that.
We'll go here and do open our source.
And here's the test.
It is showing that first we create an instance of our My Data Loader basic.
Then we listen for when it gets loaded.
We'll check on the data loaded back from the server.
Again, this is just calling a web page, and whatever the web page source code is returning it as a
big blob of text.
So it's going to look like some HTML stuff.
And as I looked at it while I was creating this, I noticed that it said doctype as part of it.
So Doctype is not something super significant, certainly not in the unity world, but I just thought
it was some little test that tells me did I get something back from a web page?
You can imagine testing for any other substring that makes sense for you.
Then finally, I do the action here that we're testing upon, and I load the asynchronous call there
and pass in the URL.
Now notice the URL is the URL of the GitHub page.
But that's not so important.
There's nothing unique there.
If you wanted to test like the google.com it will just go and call google.com and get the the source
code back from that.
I don't really want to focus on what I'm doing here in the production code, because it's an admittedly
simple example.
I just wanted it to be a way to get something asynchronous happening inside unity.
So let's look at the source code just so we understand.
Here.
What we're doing.
When I call load, I just say, hey, make sure that the URL is not empty.
Then I go ahead and I use Unity's web request, which is built in functionality.
I call send request on that, and then I set the result to be the download handler's text.
This is just a super cheap, easy way.
Recommended by unity to call simple data online.
Very simple and straightforward.
Now this brings up a question what actually are we testing here?
I have a custom class called my data loader, but inside I'm heavily depending on some existing unity
functionality of unity web request.
Then I'm calling some web page in this case GitHub.
And that's involved.
If GitHub was somehow down for the day, this test would fail.
Is that appropriate?
If my unit test is really about testing my own methodology, my own functionality, I shouldn't consider
it a failed test.
If some unrelated dependency fails.
But here that's the case.
I would fail if GitHub was down.
Also, inside here I'm using Unity web request that's built in functionality by unity.
We hope that it works 100% of the time in all situations, but it's possible that my code works and
its code doesn't work.
So there's a gray area here.
When you think about designing your classes and then designing the tests on those classes, how do you
know what you should actually focus on?
Testing, generally speaking.
And there's books and books written on this subject of how to approach the art of unit testing.
But generally speaking, you want to reduce your dependencies down, and you want to simplify the number
of code lines that you're testing.
So less code is better because it's more simple and focused and you know exactly in isolation which
code you're testing on.
So this is a perfect example.
But for us it's a great way to get started and just talk about asynchronous code running.
So for now we'll end this example.
Hello and welcome to Unit Testing for unity.
We're going to be looking at my data loader in advanced version here.
To see this demo in action we're going to open up unity Download and use the Source sample project for
this course.
And we'll take a look at a key scene here.
That is the My Data loader advanced.
Some of the concepts I'm going to talk about here include dependency injection as we see and end substitute.
Here we are inside unity I've got the scene for the My Data loader advanced ready and ready to go here.
So we'll go ahead and run that scene for quite a lot of these scenes in the workshop.
Running the production scene is not the interesting thing, but I always encourage you to do it just
as a starting point.
So here we see simple console log that says length of the data loaded is this.
That value is not too important, but you can dig into that example class if you want to take a look
at it.
Let's run the test for it.
So up here I've got my category set to my data loader advanced.
So we're only seeing the tests related to that and only in edit mode.
There's also a play mode test you can take a look at on your own time.
But I think that the edit mode is more interesting here.
So I will do run all.
And here we see we've got two tests and they both pass with a green check, which is great.
Let's look at both the load async and the mock load async and take a look at how they work.
So here we are in the sample code.
If you followed along from the last video and I hope you do.
We went over the method that we're looking at here, which uses an actual call to a web server, loads
the data back and checks the value of it.
This closely resembles what the production use case would it be?
But we've talked about some of the problems there.
Am I testing my code or am I testing Unity Web Service underneath it?
Am I testing that or am I testing the back end of github.com?
And if it's a stable server, you want to focus your tests on your own custom code and have as least
and fewest dependencies as possible.
So there's some problems with this.
The first thing that I did when I went about this is to think about dependency injection.
Let's say that in production I want to have one way that I call this and that it is implemented, that
is using Unity web service.
Then for testing, maybe I want to have a second way that I want to approach it.
Now, you could have a flag in your code base that says something like is debug equals true or is production
equals false?
And in your production code, do certain things in test mode and certain things not.
I see a lot of that happen in code bases, but that's generally not a good practice.
You are polluting your production code with really stuff that's only for tests, so it's not as appropriate.
This is a better solution here.
Let's take a look at what we do.
Well, in the previous basic example, I did not have a concept of a network service, nor did I pass
it in here.
We just created it and it always worked one way.
But the dependency injection here is that I decide.
Here's some custom way that this could work.
Here's some of the logic that I could swap out in a few different ways.
I declare it here in one line, and then I pass it in.
So you could imagine having several different network services.
I could have one that's just for testing, one that's just for production, one that just writes to
a local disk, one that is appropriate for a particular backend server.
ET cetera.
This has production use cases as well.
This idea of dependency injection.
Now why do we call it dependency injection.
It's because instead of my data loader advanced always doing one thing, I pass in some info that decides
how it's going to operate.
So rather than the class itself knowing everything here, I'm passing in a dependency in this case to
the Unity Web Request Network service.
So let's take a look at how that structured, and then we'll see why it is helpful for us as we do our
testing.
So here's the complete source code for the My Data loader advanced.
Now two things I want to focus on here.
One is that in its constructor I pass in that dependency.
Now dependency injection and how to create flexible classes from this concept of dependency injection
are really outside of the scope of this class.
It's a really good thing for you to go and look at.
You could google something like D I for unity or dependency injection for unity, or even dependency
injection in object oriented programming, and see some more of those general concepts.
But assuming you have somewhat of a familiarity, especially given my my explanation, I just gave there,
let's move forward with it.
Now that I'm passing in that as a dependency here and storing it, then any time I call our core functionality
of load async, what I do is I say, okay, when I'm ready to load async, just tell my network service
to load async.
Now you can imagine if I've passed in a network service that does a load async for a back end server
of a particular technology.
This line here would do that.
That if I passed in something else that did a writing to disk or reading from disk as a different type
of network service, this is the line here that would really change.
So I don't have to have 2 or 3 different versions of the my data loader advanced here.
Instead, I pass in a custom implementation that handles that particular detail in a unique way.
It's a very powerful way for you to have your code be more flexible.
Now, now that we've talked about passing in a dependency and how it is able to wrap the functionality
here, let's look at what the source for this particular one is.
So up here in the same class file I've got a couple things to talk about.
One, I created an interface.
This interface here of I network service declares okay, anybody who wants to be considered as a viable
dependency to be passed in here has to have some method or methods available.
And in this case, it just needs to have the load async and take a string URL.
That's it.
Now if you're not too familiar with with interfaces.
Please go check out interfaces.
You could look at something like interfaces versus classes in C-sharp or in unity, and you'll see lots
of examples.
But an important distinction here is that the interface defines what the public API is, but it doesn't
worry about doing the implementation.
The implementation is declared down here in a public class.
Now classes you're probably more familiar with.
And what we do here is we implement a particular flavor of that.
I network service in this particular flavor should look very familiar to you from the previous video.
This is the exact same implementation.
We're just using unity web request and then doing its send web request methodology.
So now that we've looked at the source code coming back here, we can see, okay, we're just creating
a custom class that handles a little bit of the functionality.
And we pass that custom class in there.
But we now have a data loader advanced class that is much more flexible.
Now, why specifically in the world of testing, is dependency injection relevant?
Well, we have a wonderful utility that we can use inside unity for our unit testing.
This is a library called N substitute and it's been included here in the sample project.
Let's take a look at another test method just below the other one.
And this is going to use what is called a mock of a class.
So here we have a very similar creation of the My Data loader advanced.
And instead of passing in the unity web request version, we're going to do something that looks quite
odd here.
We're going to use substitute library.
And what we're going to do here is we're going to say hey on the fly in these two lines, go create
me a class that can handle just the functionality I need.
But because it's a mock class, it doesn't necessarily have to actually go call the server.
What it's going to do instead is, at key moments, return a predictable value to us.
Now remember, our flow here is that the test tells the data loader to go load a URL inside the data
loader tells the network service to go load a URL.
That last step, the end result is it takes a half a second, goes and loads from the server and returns
a string back.
So all I really need in a mock situation is okay, don't even call a server.
Just when I call this you give me a string back.
So I'm saying here with this language that I want any time I call load async and I pass in any string
for the URL, then return the word mocked data.
Then down here, I could make sure that I'm getting the expected result that I want, instead of checking
that it has doctype in the return as I did previously.
I can check for the mock data here.
So what we're seeing here is a very simple example, and it might not seem useful, but imagine in a
more complex example where we weren't just loading data, we were loading it, reading, writing, transforming
the data, doing quite a bit, maybe a 5 or 6 different methods.
All of them could be pointing to wildly different systems, but when we really want to test just the
data loader, then we want to pass in mocked abilities for those other systems to be just kind of temporarily
ignored so we can focus on just what we have at hand here.
Now let's take a look at what would happen.
So I call the load async.
What's going to happen is this system inside is going to return the predicted value.
And the data loader is then going to call loaded.
And it's going to have its result value be the value that we expect it to be.
So let's run this inside the unity editor.
So we'll hit run all here.
And it works quite quickly.
Let's even compare if I just run load async which is actually calling a server.
It was quick.
Then if I call mock load async which is not calling any server.
May not be evident from the video, but it's much faster to call the MOC.
And that makes sense because we're not actually calling a server and waiting for a result.
So this isn't just to save us a few seconds.
It's again for us to focus as we're designing our tests.
What actually do we want to test?
And then we want to isolate it.
So we're not actually testing a Unity Web Services class.
We're not testing a GitHub back end.
Testing several systems together is called an integration test.
That is an appropriate type of test.
But it's outside of what we're talking about here, which is unit testing.
Again, getting down to as few dependencies as possible, few lines of code.
You could think about it.
So that's it there we've looked at how to use the substitute library and how also we can do a mock for
a call to the back end server.
So thanks.
Hello and welcome to Unit testing for unity.
We're in the workshop here.
And in this one we're going to take a look at the character in a basic form.
We're going to have a few different ones we're going to look at.
We'll start with the basics and move on to something more advanced.
Let's take a look at this demo in action.
Inside the unity editor.
We're going to open up unity, open up our sample project.
And then we're going to play one or more scenes related to the topic here.
The scene is going to be the character basic, and I'm going to be talking about Monobehaviour as something
that can or can't be tested, as well as play mode versus edit mode, something that I've mentioned
earlier in the course.
We'll bring it back here and talk about it.
Here we are in the project looking at the character basic.
Let's go ahead and run the scene.
So while most of our workshops we've done already had a pretty boring scene where absolutely nothing
of interest was happening here, we have a little bit more.
When we hit play there, we see a cube white cube that gets made created in the center of the screen.
I can use my arrow keys and move around.
So while admittedly a very simple example here, this is meant to talk about some of the more complex
aspects of testing inside unity.
In the previous scenes, we weren't worried about rendering graphics or taking input.
We did talk in the last workshop about the difference between testing several different dependencies
together.
For example, a method that inside calls a second method that inside calls a third.
Those are dependencies.
Here we're talking about a similar aspect, except every time I want to move my character, I first
ask to listen to Unity's input system, then use Unity's Monobehaviour transform movement.
Right.
So we're we're using several different dependencies there or different classes.
So here I'm able to use the arrow keys to move around.
And that's pretty much it.
But the idea is we're doing a bit more than before.
Let's talk about the implications of testing that.
So up here in the test runner, I have the category set to our character basic, which is great.
Then I can toggle on to see the play mode tests as well as the edit mode tests.
We can see that we've got some of both, but because there's a monobehaviour involved, I'm going to
focus more on the play mode.
Now, in each of the workshops, I've included at least one edit mode test and at least one play mode
test for the scene at hand.
I've done that again here, but depending on what you're actually testing, you want to think, is this
more appropriate for edit mode or is it more appropriate for play mode?
There's an art and a science to how you'd approach that, and how you would design your code to be more
testable.
But a general way to look at it that's relevant for here is that if you're using Monobehaviour functionality,
that sounds more like a play mode test, the more unity libraries, particularly at runtime, you're
using in your production, you want to think about those being play mode tests.
It's not a hard rule, but that's a good way to start thinking about it.
So let's run our tests here.
I have the play mode and I will run all.
Okay.
It took a couple seconds to run there, but we've got them all.
What actually happens when you're running a play mode test is it creates a brand new empty scene and
runs just one test inside of it, and it destroys that.
And it creates a brand new scene guaranteeing that we have the world space provided by a scene.
But the freshness of a new scene that doesn't have any dependencies or stale info that might influence
the test.
So we like how that's set up.
Now, the things that I'm doing are moving, moving by key code and moving to a particular place.
So let's take a look at this move to test.
Actually, let's take a look at the production code first.
So if I go here and I look at the basic example.
This is the production code.
Let's look at that before I go into the tests.
So here all I do is I create a primitive.
You could imagine also loading a prefab here if you wanted to do that.
But I wanted to slowly get us into all the complexities of runtime and unity.
So I'm not using a prefab here.
I just create a brand new cube from scratch with a line of code.
I give it a name there just for organization sake, and then I add the component of the monobehaviour
that I want to actually test.
Then one of the things that I'm doing is just moving it to the point of 000, and then showing that
value out on the screen.
So let's take a look at the source code here.
Here's character basic.
This extends Monobehaviour.
Now, if you're familiar with unity, you probably use Monobehaviours all the time as a good best practice.
You want to start thinking conscientiously.
When is it appropriate to use a monobehaviour and when can I use something different?
As beginning developers, we create everything as a child of monobehaviour, but with time and experience
you realize there's pros and cons of using monobehaviours.
One of the cons is historically, it was more difficult to test along the way.
Unity provided these playmode tests.
So now we can certainly test Playmode and we can test Monobehaviours.
So that's great, but there's still some drawbacks.
Again, Monobehaviour is going to rely on more systems of unity under the hood.
And when we're trying to test our custom code, we might not be sure where a problem might lie.
Is it our code or is it Unity's code?
So again, there's a few dependencies there.
This is all okay, but it's something you want to think about as you're designing your classes and as
you're designing your tests.
So we've got a movement speed.
We've got a movement type.
This is just the direction of the arrow key that I'm pressing.
Then we use the Unity's update.
Now really let me double check here.
Really.
The update loop here is the only major monobehaviour functionality that I'm using.
The rest of this code doesn't necessarily have to be in a monobehaviour.
I am also using Unity's input system, so that's a second dependency.
So let's see what I do every frame of update.
I call this method here move by input.
I check to see is the user hitting a particular key or keys on the keyboard.
And then I call move by key code down here.
All we do is say, if we're currently moving left, then let's move in a vector for the left direction.
If we're currently moving right and etcetera for up and down.
So this would allow you to move in all four of the directions using the four arrow keys.
So pretty straightforward code.
And if you've created your own custom character before you'd be familiar with setting something like
this up.
Down here, we've got two methods.
One that lets us move to a particular point and one that lets us move by a unit.
So let's say I wanted to move the right one unit.
I could pass in by one unit by one unit by one unit.
If I want to move directly to a particular point in space, that would be the move to.
So these are not necessarily the only methods you would need in a custom character class, but there's
some pretty common ones.
So we'll end this lesson here with just this as a basic, appropriate working way to test some functionality.
If you want to take a look at the edit mode or the other tests that are here in the play mode, go ahead
and do that.
I'll move on to the next video.
Thanks.
Hello and welcome to Unit Testing for unity.
In this workshop we're looking at the character class in an advanced version.
Let's take a look at this demo in action.
Here.
We're going to open up our unity.
We're going to open up our sample project.
And we're going to take a look at a scene inside for the character advanced situation here.
I want to talk a little bit about code separation.
Earlier in one of the workshops, I talked about the different dependencies that you'd have.
For example, if you're calling a back end server.
And in that situation, we used a substitute library to mock out and not need to call the back end.
It's a similar discussion here where we're looking at what are the dependency involved with a particular
test scenario, and how do we be aware of those different dependencies, and what do we want to do about
it here?
We're not going to use the substitute library.
We're going to think about separating our monobehaviour from other code and taking a look.
So here we are inside unity.
We've got a production class.
Let's take a look at it.
Running.
Down here, we see that we can move around with our arrow keys.
Just like in the basic example, the end user experience is the same.
And that's something of an interesting example here, that some of the changes that we do for the code
quality and testability of our systems doesn't necessarily impact the end user.
That's a positive.
So let's take a look at the production code here.
We'll open up the character advanced example.
Here's a complete example.
What we're doing inside the wake of this example class is we're creating a primitive for the cube.
We give it a name for organization sake.
Then instead of one line here where we just add a component that has all of our functionality, we do
two steps.
This is reminding me a little bit of the dependency injection we saw in the My Data loader example.
But this is a different use case with different dependencies.
So instead of just one add component line we do the add component.
And then we create our own non monobehaviour character advanced class.
And we pass in the Monobehaviour.
So we're passing in the dependency that the character advanced is going to use.
Now character advanced is not a monobehaviour, and thereby we have more flexibility with how we want
to test it.
We could test it at edit mode for example, more easily.
Again, whenever you're using Monobehaviours that's more appropriate for play mode tests.
It's not a hard rule, but that's one way to think about it.
So here, by separating our monobehaviour from our non monobehaviour, we've got a few more options.
Now we're still here in a play play mode environment because this is the production code.
Let's step in and see how our source code is changed.
So here we are in the character advanced.
You'll see that it looks pretty familiar.
Most of the code in here is going to be just like the previous basic example.
The few exceptions.
One is that the character advanced is going to take in a reference in its constructor to the Monobehaviour.
This is because it needs to know some things about the Monobehaviour, particularly around its transform
position.
There's also a situation where we need to use the second line and tell the Monobehaviour a reference
back to us as the character advanced.
This is just so that the Monobehaviour, whenever it calls update can tell us to do the proper move.
There's other ways you could organize this, but for simplicity's sake, we're passing in the monobehaviour
and handling it this way.
Let's see what other changes we see in the code base.
The move type is the same as the basic.
The move by input is the same.
Down here the move by key code is very similar, if not identical.
And then down here in the move to and move by, you can notice that we are getting and setting the position
on the transform of the Monobehaviour.
So again we have mostly a non monobehaviour class here doing what it can do without any dependency on
monobehaviour and only in the most necessary spots does it address the Monobehaviour.
That separation begins to help us think about how could we test just the monobehaviour if we could,
how could we test just the non monobehaviour if we could?
Now, this isn't a perfect example because it's kind of the mid step as we're going along learning about
how we can properly separate these.
But I think it's a good learning.
So look at the source code here for character advanced.
Compare it to character basic on your own time and see the differences there.
Then let's take a look at the example that we do.
Again.
Here's the example that we saw.
So it's these two lines.
That's really the key.
We're going to add a component of the character advanced Monobehaviour onto our game object.
And then we're going to create a new character advanced.
That's a separate step.
So you could imagine we would be able to test those two things in isolation.
Now they are quite dependent on each other.
There's ways that we could massage that so that one does not directly depend on the other.
Or we could do something like we did in the data loader example and use a substitute library so that
we're mocking in the dependency instead.
But again, for simplicity of just learning how to separate a monobehaviour apart, I think we've done
the case here.
You can run those tests with the edit mode and the play mode on your own time and take a look at this.
But for me, I think we're done talking about the differences in separating monobehaviour and non monobehaviour.
Thanks.
Hello and welcome to Unit Testing for unity.
This is our workshop talking about character physics.
Now in previous workshops we've slowly moved from a very simple character example, moving with arrow
keys to the advanced example separating Monobehaviour and non monobehaviour concerns.
And here in this one we're going to talk about what if we depend on yet another unity system like physics.
And also when we're using physics in this particular example our movement becomes fuzzier.
Meaning I don't click left and it immediately clicks to a position.
It slowly moves over time.
How would we be able to test the value that is slowly changing over time?
So we'll talk about a few of those things here in the source code.
So to take a look at this demo, we are opening up our unity editor and the sample project.
The scene here is going to be the character physics scene.
And one of the things we're going to be looking at is how to test those fuzzy values.
I called it again, fuzzy values to me is values that aren't necessarily instantaneous, changing from
A to B, they slowly animate over time, such as the position of an object or a score that gradually
counts up.
These are all areas where you'd want to be able to test something over time, and we have one easy approach
here to do that.
It's not the only way to solve it, but it's one that I think helps us learning along the way.
So let's take a look.
So here we are in the unity project.
We've got the character physics example open.
Let's go ahead and run the scene.
Now here I'm able to move using the arrow keys.
And in previous examples here in the workshop, we've seen it click over every click I did on the left
arrow, the position would click instantaneously changing, but here there's a smoother movement.
I can still use all the arrow keys to direct different traffic of which way it should go, but the idea
of it moving slowly over time is really the novel situation now.
There's lots of ways you could do that in unity, but I chose to use the physics system just to talk
a little bit about what happens if we've got a few more unity systems involved.
Remember what we've been stretching with?
And as an idea here is that in an ideal world, you get your unit testing to test the fewest lines of
dependency, fewest lines of code at once.
But a lot of times our production code isn't so simplistic.
We are depending on different things.
So with my data loader and with previous character examples here, we've seen some of the ways to handle
those different dependencies.
This is one more example a little bit more complex than the rest.
Let's take a look at the production code here.
So here we'll look at the character physics example.
We open that up?
And here we've got creating a character primitive.
Here we create the game object first with the cube in appearance for the primitive, and then we add
the component of the character physics monobehaviour.
And then we have a separate character physics class that we take that in there.
So we're already separating from one monolithic class of monobehaviour into two.
So that's a good way to get our code more simplistic and doing a single purpose each in there.
We saw in the previous example that most of the Monobehaviour functionality we needed was just the update.
That's the only thing we really needed to take care of.
So by moving all the non update stuff into the second class, we now have something that's easier to
test.
Then in this simple example, we moved to a particular position.
Now let's run the tests and then let's take a look at the production code.
So here let's take a look at running the selected.
It's all running there.
Everything passes.
Now that's just the play mode test.
But we have also got edit mode tests if you want to dig in and take a look at it again, because we're
dealing with monobehaviour stuff.
It feels more appropriate to use a play mode.
So that's the approach I've done here.
But it's up to you and your project to decide which systems you want to test.
Edit mode and which ones you want to test.
Play mode.
So now that we've seen those tests, let's take a quick look here at the source code for the class.
And then we'll look at some of the tests on top.
All right.
So here we are in the character physics.
We're going to see it's pretty similar to the character advanced we saw last.
Again we've separated the Monobehaviour and the non monobehaviour class.
So here is the non monobehaviour class that's doing most of the work.
Notice here inside its constructor it takes a reference to the Monobehaviour and stores it and then
also passes into the Monobehaviour a reference to this class here.
That's so that it can call the move by every time it does an update.
Now there's different ways you could organize that.
You could even remove the hardcoded dependency we have on each other here.
But for the sake of simplicity in this example, this is very appropriate.
Going down the code.
Again, it's just like the advanced in most parts.
I'll do want to call out where there's physics being used.
So here in movement, instead of just moving by the position hardcoded over one instance Taneous update,
we're going to be using the move position here.
And then under Add force, which is a new method that I did that is going to be moving based on physics
forces.
So imagine this is a block and we're giving a push on one side.
And then based on friction and mass and gravity, you know there's some sort of consequence that tends
to be a fuzzier reaction here using the add force.
And we're moving by add force up here at the top of the same class file we see the physics monobehaviour
is declared.
It's pretty familiar in that the same character advanced we saw in the last workshop looks pretty similar,
but we do have a rigid body here that we're storing.
And then when this class wakes up, we do some attaching of the rigid body and then set some physics
values.
So if we think about just kind of recapping instead of having one monobehaviour that does all the physics
and movement together, we've separated the monobehaviour from the non monobehaviour.
Then inside the Monobehaviour we do the update loop and we also take care of some physics stuff.
Then from the other one, the non monobehaviour, we're able to move as we want and take character input,
so take keyboard input and stuff like that.
So it's a pretty good separation here and gets us going with what we need.
Let me think out loud if there's anything else I wanted to mention about this.
Um, yeah.
So I teased about the idea here.
If you wanted to reduce the hardcoded dependency that we have each class depending on each other and
get more of the flexibility that we saw in the My Data loader example, you could certainly declare
interfaces and address it that way.
But we don't need to do that here.
We'll just go back and run the example one more time.
So back here in unity we're running and we've got the arrow keys moving around.
In the last few videos we've seen examples of reducing complexity.
So reducing different dependencies some flexibility to separate our code out.
So for the sake of this example here using input and physics and monobehaviours or stuff like that I
think we're all done here.
Thanks.
Hi.
That covers a lot of the different topics that I wanted to have in the workshop so far, but there's
plenty of room for more topics in the future.
We've seen in the workshops covered so far.
This simplest example learning the test runner, seeing how we can make playmode tests, edit mode tests,
learning a little bit about the differences of play mode and edit mode, and why you would want to test
in one or the other, or both.
Then we also saw some of the options we have when we have asynchronous functionality, or when we're
dependent on other systems.
What could we do to reduce that dependency for the sake of the test?
Along the way there, we're learning some different things about dependency injection and separating
the concerns of our code.
Those principles are useful in production code anyway, and we're beginning to see some of the ways
that when you prepare your code to be more testable, we're also creating code that is designed well
for production.
So having dependency injection allows flexibility that you can use at runtime, reducing the complexity
of your systems by passing in flexible varieties of different dependencies when you need to.
We've also seen by separating a monolithic large monobehaviour into just what we need from the monobehaviour
and moving the other code into a lighter weight non monobehaviour class, we again get some flexibility
that is useful in production and also helps us here in the testing world.
I think overall some of the challenges that we're seeing are what happens when you have multiple dependencies
or lots of systems called from one particular method.
That might be a sign that that method is bloated and doing too much, or it might be a sign that it's
a lean and appropriate designed one.
But we need to have some additional thoughts and considerations when we go to testing that functionality.
So I hope this has been helpful for you.
I look forward to covering even more topics in this series as well, and they'll be added again in over
time.
So thanks again.